on april 5th
1975 a conference entitled the central
intelligence agency
and world peace was held in new haven
connecticut
on the campus of yale university from
the evening session of the conference
colonel fletcher prouty talks of his
experiences
with the cia from post-world war ii
until the early 1960s colonel prouty
is a former liaison officer between the
defense department
and the cia fletcher prouty
as far back as 1943
i went into saudi arabia on what was
then termed a clandestine operation it
was a rather modest affair
but if you can remember in the latter
part of 1943 the country was planning to
meet roosevelt was planning to meet with
churchill
and with chiang kai-shek in cairo
to add a little flavor to their meeting
and perhaps to
underscore its pertinency to today's
headlines
they sent a team into saudi arabia where
they were just beginning to discover
that there was a lot of petroleum and a
fourth
world leader took part in the cairo
conference that few people either knew
about
or recall and he was king ibn saud
shortly thereafter we went up to tehran
to the tehran conference
and we met with stalin
churchill and roosevelt and the world
press read that
china was not represented there because
russia was not at war
officially with japan and it would be
improper to have
china there in other words we were
getting used to telling people what we
wanted them to believe
instead of what was actually going on
because i happened to be the pilot of
the airplane
that flew the chinese to tehran
in 1944 i did a lot of work in turkey
because we found out that there was a
gold smuggling ring of tremendous
proportions
moving gold from germany right through
the lines
and somehow it was getting to latin
america and i think we've all read since
then what a tremendous amount of gold
was moved through that area
and the effect it has had upon relations
with latin america
and certain other world powers since
that time we went into turkey to try to
break that ring
and it eventually it was some of you
remember a
movie actor named bruce cabot he was one
of the men that was
wrapped up in it i went up into russia
later that year
on an operation that had to do really
with the what we call shuttle bombing
or the lack thereof since all the
bombers were destroyed on the ground by
the german
air force and uh in sending so many
planes in there we thought it'd be a
good chance to get a little intelligence
so we slipped an extra plane in to do
some
map filling there were too many blanks
in the russian maps and we didn't know
enough about the country
and in a rather amateur way they
equipped the plane which i flew
into the soviet union up around kiev
from tehran
so again it was part of the growing move
toward that kind of activity
in august of 45 i was among those who
went into tokyo at the time of the
surrender
flew back by going over hiroshima and
landed in okinawa
and in okinawa saw them loading ships as
many as they could
in that famous harbor that had been at
naha that had been bombed by the
kamikaze so frequently
and i'm going down to the docks to see
what was going on
we found that tons and tons and
boatloads of supplies that had been
brought to okinawa for the
japanese invasion and would not be
needed
were being shipped southward being
shipped to a harbor
whose name in those days we hardly knew
called hypong
and from high pawn that would be
delivered to hanoi
to a colonel whose name i happen to
remember
it was gia and jiops boss was a man
named
ho chi minh and the reason we were
dividing the
mountains of supplies on okinawa between
korea on one hand
and indochina on the other was
that we had through the oss the
precursor or the cia contact with ho chi
minh in the name of a major general
named gallagher
and general gallagher had received
authority
to bring more than 10 complete divisions
of equipment
into hypong for delivery of general gia
whom the french were fighting not too
many years later
but these are some of the things that
help you put into perspective
how our country began to
internationalize
clandestine efforts i had the real
pleasure to come home from okinawa and
find orders
that sent me here to yale and i taught
here at yale for three years with what
was then the
first days of the air force's rotc
program
i think some of the people that were in
our classes in those days
have participated in things now that
they look back on quite a different
program that we run
in the years since i left here because
i went on into the korean war and here
again
we supported activities
such as airdrops in the chinese area
we supported activities in the
philippines that were as i mentioned
this afternoon
some of you that led to the election of
mag saisai
this was a major operation run by the
cia
we flew the mike saisai team as we
called them into saigon
to support president diem as he became
got started and as some of you have read
in the pentagon papers
it was called a saigon military mission
of course there were no military in the
military mission that was just its name
as most of the activities in vietnam
were named military activities up
through about
1963 when finally the escalation reached
the point
where when marines came in it became a
military action up to that time
most of the operational action was
sort of around the corner it was under
the operational control of
central intelligence agency
we did some work in india in those days
and again going across what we call the
embassy run on southeast asia
back into saudi arabia whereby that time
1954 1955
the oil discoveries there had bloomed
into the greatest air oil field in the
world
and today we certainly recognize the
importance of that
so much for laying a little ground rules
here a little uh
background to show that
this country began clandestine
activities a little tentatively as part
of military programs
at the end of the war the first official
action that truman took
in what we used to call the
demobilization was
the disbanding of the oss
and in its place he established what he
called a central intelligence
group the central intelligence group was
formed by
presidential direction simply to bridge
the time between the oss which was going
out of business
and the formation of a central
intelligence agency which is then being
discussed by congress
and any of you who hope to understand
the cia
and understand what our country was
doing in establishing this organization
must go back into the history and look
at the
discussions the debates
the arguments of the
that period 4647
the war had ended we were without
question the leading military power in
the world
we had the atomic weapons and yet all of
a sudden
recognizing the power of the atomic
weapons
and knowing full well that any
scientific
achievement is simply uh
proof that it can be done therefore any
other scientists and any other engineers
can build a weapon we knew that there
was only a certain amount of time
before russia or any other country could
obtain and use those weapons if they
could work out a means of delivery and
even that wasn't too
serious so much of our
trust for intelligence in those days
involved whether or not the soviet
community was gaining the upper hand
or was moving up on us you might say in
the field of atomic energy
with this behind the thrust and knowing
also that in world war ii our
intelligence community was too
separated the navy would get
intelligence it wouldn't tell the army
or the army would have intelligence it
wouldn't tell the navy
the fbi was responsible for intelligence
in latin america the oss was operating
but the oss didn't bother much with
intelligence and so on
so there were two great drives one was
to establish
a coordinated intelligence system and
the other was to gain all the
intelligence we could
on a nuclear weapons working under this
drive
then congress put together the law which
today
prescribes precisely how they
wanted the cia the central intelligence
agency
organized here again we must be very
precise in our interpretations about
this law
for example when psy hirsch released
this information a little while ago
about
thousands and thousands of people at the
agency have been
tapping or investigating in domestic
surveillance
one of the things that bill colby came
out and said
real quickly was well this
we weren't really investigating domestic
activities we were checking on
people who were friends of foreigners
here in the united states who want to
see how far they had gone in other words
opening a door to say that
the central intelligence agency is
charged by law
with protecting its sources and methods
how many times have all of you heard
that that the central intelligence
central intelligence agency is charged
by law with protecting its sources and
methods in fact they bring people to
court for that
for the revealing sources and methods
but if any you look that up do you know
that that is not
part of the law the law does not say
anywhere
the central intelligence agency is
responsible for protecting sources and
methods
but ever since alan dulles began to
build the clandestine side of the agency
they have tried to make people
including most of our senators and most
of our
members of the house believe that this
is one of the reasons why they become
involved at least peripherally
in the investigation of people here in
the domestic scene to protect sources
and methods now what the law
does say and the law was very correct
about it
that the director of central
intelligence
not the head of the central intelligence
agency the director of central
intelligence who was also the director
of navy intelligence or army
intelligence or state department
intelligence
is responsible for the protection of
sources and methods for a very
obvious reason that if navy intelligence
uncovers somebody over in this room an
army intelligence and covers somebody in
that room it turns out that both of them
are working with somebody in another
room
they better tell each other before
somebody knocks the other guy's head off
that's a pretty practical reason but to
say that the central intelligence agency
is responsible with that is a different
part of the machinery entirely and the
law doesn't say that
but there are many of these things in
this law
that we are sort of
brainwashed into believing are in the
law one of the senators who is on this
committee
that is working on the investigation the
agency asked me a while back
he said what is there about the agency's
secret charter
that we should know and how many times
have you all heard about that there is a
charter for the agency that gives them
the right to do all these things
and they quote something about being
able to do whatever the national
security council directs them from time
to time
and that therefore this gets them into
the clandestine business
that isn't the way congress wrote the
law
the law that established the central
intelligence agency
did it to coordinate intelligence the
agency was created
to inc coordinate the intelligence of
other departments and agencies of
other departments and agencies congress
knew we had
intelligence what it needed was
coordination
central coordination or as harry truman
said i've now got
an intelligence arm that can brief me
the president
and i get it all in one place instead of
having to go to all the separate ones
that's what the law said and subordinate
to that
there are five sub-paragraphs but
sub-paragraphs are always supporting it
to the main paragraph
and they simply deal in the routine
things like printing intelligence doing
things of common concern like running
computers
and then that final one that mr dulles
made us believe was the catch-all
saying that the agency will do those
things
which the national security council from
time to time
made direct i used to have
in my files when i worked in the office
of the secretary of defense
the original copy of that paper
and in the margin of that copy in the
personal
pencil handwriting of president
eisenhower was an explanation of what
was meant
by nsc 5412 slant 2 which some of you
may know as the olds 10 slant 2
or they used to say the clandestine
direction or the
secret charter it wasn't that at all it
was a clarification
of this subparagraph which is in the law
and in the margin
eisenhower had written that anyone
who utilized the this version of the
law was to remember that time to time
meant that the agency would have no
power consecutively to carry out
operations
in a continuity and secondly
that they would carry them out only when
directed
and the reason he wrote that on the copy
that came to the secretary of defense
was
that when the agency needed the
equipment aircraft
weapons people at one time i had the
names of more than seven thousand
military people and six hundred and five
military units that were that existed in
the defense department
in support of the clandestine activities
agency but when these were to be used
it was to be from time to time only and
then specifically
by direction of the agency how different
that is
from what a lot of people are saying
today even some of them who are
well intentioned about the things that
the agency is permitted to do
i called your attention the current
issue of newsweek
in that issue on the sheet of the column
that is headed
my turn some gentleman says we should
abandon the agency do away with it we
don't need it i forgot his name it's a
pretty good article but in it
he also is stating some of these things
that are not so
that make you think that there's a
secret charter that we don't know
about i can tell you categorically
that other than the law of 1947
and some revisions in 1949 which have
mostly to do with pay retirement the
handling of money
which is much abused there is no secret
charter
and how can i stand on those words it
was my job
for years for nine years to be specific
to brief such men as the secretary of
defense and many of them
mr mcelroy mr gates mr mcnamara
and many other senior officers in the
pentagon
on files which had been collected over
the years ever since the original act
had been
been written and all of the national
security council papers
and all of what we call today the 40
committee papers
and any other letters of substance that
pertain to the agency
and in those days 1955 56
57 58 when this business was handled a
little more precisely than it is today
there was absolutely no reason at all to
shield from the secretary of defense
anything as important as a secret
charter there is no secret charter
and having said that then there is
nothing but the law
and having said that then then when we
investigate cia
the thing to look for is to ask the
agency what have you done
that we're paying you to do almost
everything else is unlawful
and that's what's important about it and
that's the ground we should stand on
and these committees that are working
today should work from that side that's
where the strength is
and all the rest of the things the
agencies are doing they could cut the
funds off
and if they cut the funds most of them
will come to a halt
but it's important to go back to those
basic things
another thing the committee should look
at is the fact that in 1948
president truman called in three
gentlemen alan dulles
matthias korea and william h jackson
and he established a commission after
one year of operation of cia
to study the cia and see how
it was performing with reference to the
law which had been passed a year earlier
it's a very interesting thing that he
did this because in 1948 especially
right in the summer toward the end of
the year
he was running against thomas e doy for
reelection and as most of you remember
the chances of truman being reelected
were pretty slim
and mr dulles who was working on this
agent cia report for truman
also happened to be the speech writer of
thomas e dewey
bellas was working under mixed emotions
you can be sure because he visualized
himself as soon as dewey was elected as
being the director of central
intelligence
he had to wait about four more years the
jackson korea and dollars report
should be surfaced just like many of us
this afternoon have said that the warren
commission work should be surfaced and
reopen and restudy
there is no more important document
somewhere buried in the
files it's a book then the
dollars-jackson career report
dated one january 1949 because that was
alandella's
minecamp that was his instructions to
the agency
and to the rest of the community what he
was going to do
in the intelligence area that was the
beginning of
organized worldwide highly funded
clandestine activities and when he
became
the director of central intelligence in
after eisenhower's election the report
which had lain there for four years
while truman ignored it became the
working document and this if anything
is the secret charter but it is not a
legal secret charter
it was written by this commission turned
into the president and later just used
without any sanction by congress
or any proper authority some of you may
recall that when
just before uh eisenhower was elected at
the end of truman's
tenure and after the korean war had
started there was a lot of feeling that
the agency had missed the boat
as they did many times in predicting
whether or not there would be a korean
war
truman replaced the then director of
central intelligence
with general walter beadle smith smith
had been ambassador
to moscow he'd been back shortly he
intended to retire but he agreed for the
rest of mr truman's term to serve
as the director of central intelligence
and this was in the pre-joe mccarty era
when uh
the term red herring or worse were
bandied about everywhere and somebody
asked
general smith in the hearings for
his uh nomination and acceptance as the
director
if by some chance thank you if there by
some chance there were
any uh kgb operators in the central
intelligence agency
and general smith uh realist pragmatist
that he was and just back from moscow
with
due respect for the savior said of
course there are pretty blew the lid off
the senate
but they said well prove it hey no he
said you asked me and he said i assume
there are
i think that current events may cause us
to look a little more carefully at what
walla beadle smith meant because some
people have scurried out of the agency
lately that
he might have had in mind
[Music]
let me bring things just a little bit up
today and then i'll close because we
have a most interesting program i'm
trying to set a certain perspective
i'm trying to get you to feel that
there's a lot of reason for going to the
guts and the bones of this affair
it's very interesting and very
titillating to talk about things that
have happened in various countries and
we could do that forever and if you want
to ask questions i'll be glad to join in
but i'm trying to stick to basic issues
so i'll close on one
much is said about the 40 committee
i've written about it recently and some
of you may have seen the article that i
wrote but what
the 40 committee is a fallout
from the days when mr dollars went to
his brother
john foster dollars and said now look
there's no reason why
when i have an operation plan a
clandestine operation i should
have to get you you're busy or
mr wilson the secretary of defense or mr
mcelroy and bring them over and have a
meeting
or the president and vice president in
other words the national security
council
there's no reason why we should have the
most important men in the country
tied down every time i want to bring
something in and see if i can get
approval
for clandestine operations let's
establish a committee
have somebody from the white house
appointed somebody from state somebody
from defense
and i'll attend the committee i allen
ellis sound like a pretty logical idea
especially when your brother's a
secretary of state that gives you two
votes out of four
and he it went through pretty easy but
look what it did
it destroyed the controls that
the congress had put over the agency
the congress knew the secretary of
defense and secretary of state and the
president and the vice president were
busy men
and that's why the congress said that if
ever the agency was to be ordered to do
something that wasn't specifically
covered by the law
it would be done only time to time
and then at the direction of the
national security council not somebody
else
and that was to keep it from happening
often and regularly
and irregularly so
in the beginning they had a little
committee they called the ten slant two
committee and it became the 5412
committee and it became the
counterinsurgency committee it became
the 303 committee and today it's the 40
committee
all the numbers mean nothing well not
nothing but originally
10 slant 2 was nsc document 10 slant 2
and so on but lately later it just got a
code name
for a group of men who sit down and tell
the agency whether or not they have the
authority to do this now does it work
that way
in my day if i got a call from central
intelligence agency and they said look
we're sending over a couple of men
we're going to need some aircraft and
we're going to need a base to operate
from and we'll probably need some money
and some ammunition and some paradox
equipment and so on
we'll come over and explain the mission
i'd say fine they'd come over
pentagon we'd have a little meeting as
soon as the door was shut and they were
on the way back to
what was then foggy bottom where their
headquarters was
i would go right up to the office of the
secretary of defense i would get out the
log
of the 40 committee and if the if that
activity was listed there
and if it was listed with full approval
then i would go to the secretary of
defense
and i would say is this the way you saw
that activity when it was presented
and if his representative the man who
had gone had briefed him on it
or if he had been there personally he'd
give me an answer yes or no
if it was no we would not provide the
support
in other words the committee did serve a
function as long as it was used that way
but by about 1961 62
63 the committee became a rubber stamp
and even less
and today the committee works even worse
because the senior man on a 40 committee
for the white house
is the secretary of defense mr kissinger
he still retains the job of the national
security advisor to the president
now this puts up a very trying situation
and it explains some of the things that
have happened quite recently
because if you go into your bank someday
and you recognize the man sitting behind
the desk
as a man whose picture you just saw as
being put in jail as a robber
doing undercover work which man do you
think you're dealing with
the robber or the banker or if you're
indira gandhi and this gentleman comes
breezing in an air force one
is he there on a clandestine activity or
is he there as a secretary of defense
and i think this explains the recent
characteristics
of what has become shuttle diplomacy
because if you're dealing with people
undercover
clandestinely in things that you can't
print
and put above board then you deal with
them two at a time
bilaterally you can't call them all in
say look fellas we've got a problem in
the middle east let's sit down talk
about it
you run from one to the other to the
other the big
error in this kind of thing the failing
in this kind of thing
and of course saying this today after it
has failed so miserably
is hindsight but it underscores it that
they all talk to each other as soon as
he leaves cairo cairo calls up
riyadh as soon as he leaves riyadh they
call they all call tehran
so they call tehran they even call
jerusalem because at least they're all
in this thing
and if they get together behind us back
there's no possible chance of
negotiation you see what it does this
clandestine activity wrecks any hope of
success
the 40 committee should be abolished it
serves no purpose
we should go back to the law which
strictly says
that if clandestine activities must be
carried out
then the president or the vice president
the secretary of defense
and the secretary of state must
in concert agree with it and that means
there would be
very few operations and they would be
limited and they would be small
and they would be very very important
now that's what the law said
and they've gone so far from that but
that's why we have the problems we have
today
i personally do not call for the
abolition of cia
i think we need intelligence good
intelligence
in fact we have good intelligence but
we've overshot the mark by
tenfold in building up the clandestine
side
what we call clandestine side of the
house that the budget of cia's about 750
million dollars that's a lot of money
but even that is open to question
because it's only a few days ago it was
revealed
that 350 million of that 750 million
went down in the pacific looking for a
submarine
don't let the figures fool you there's
nearer to six billion dollars being
spent every year in the name of
intelligence
and we all need to look into it thank
you
in the second half of this program
colonel fletcher prouty
speaking to an afternoon session of the
conference details the role of the
central intelligence agency
in political assassination fletcher
prouty
this subject which i'm going to get into
i might call the anatomy of
assassination or the politics
of assassination assassination is a big
business
in fact assassination is the business of
big business
i've written quite a bit on this subject
in
various magazines and for those of you
that have managed to get
past some of the pictures that occur in
some of those magazines
you'll know that in november issue of
genesis i wrote on the
subject of the kennedy assassination
last just last month march issue of
genesis i wrote about
international assassinations and i have
to write five months ahead of time
i have an article completed and in the
mail on the 24th of march
on assassinations in which i talked
about the possibility of
further assassinations in the middle
east and as i went to the post office on
the 25th with a newspaper under my arm
about the assassination of king faisal
i had the intention of taking the
article back home and
bringing it up to date you see it's a
that kind of a subject
what was your first thought when you
read about the assassination of king
faisal
what what goes through the minds of
the perpetrators of assassinations
are we again confronted with a young man
that was alone
nut who kept the diary and friends on a
grassy knoll
down there in saudi arabia or was the
king
killed by some sort of a machine or
conspiracy that
had other plans for actions in the
middle east
mr kissinger had left the middle east
the day before
mr mr nixon had tallied in dallas until
the morning
of the assassination so
there's a theme running through these
things that
the king is dead but what
what is the meaning then of the controls
that
that go through these things in this
case the
resumption of power in saudi arabia
almost seemed to be a little too even
too easy
what had what had really happened there
and i think what had really happened
there
will give us a picture of what goes on
in assassinations
what the how they are kind of come about
and then we can take that kind of a
picture and begin to unravel
some of the others and we might come a
little closer to the mark
[Music]
technically what happened in saudi
arabia
is that the king's guard the king's
elite
was broken now you can keep a man alive
if you don't believe that read your
history of
general de gaulle even in the deepest
and darkest days of world war ii
there were thousands of people who would
like to have
had a shot at de gaulle i remember after
the cairo conference
in marrakech morocco
churchill was recovering from about with
influenza and de gaulle came to visit
him
several times you can't imagine the
security precautions
that were taken in morocco to keep the
good general alive
i was in lima peru in march of 1964
when de gaulle came and captivated the
country of peru
hundreds of thousands of peruvians
filled plaza de armas to such an extent
that they were pressing against the
walls and trampling the trees
and yet general de gaulle who good many
inches
taller than i am walked among these
peruvians that night
with searchlights on him in that huge
arena
among hundreds of thousands of people
and it wasn't a person
took a shot at him because in the six
months six months before he went to lima
the people whose business it was to keep
de gaulle alive the gorillas if you
remember their
term of endearment had thoroughly worked
over the city of lima
had combed every list for people in that
city who might
be anti-gaulist had provided them with
resort hotels a long way off
and had made sure that when the general
came to town he would stay alive
what is it then that keeps these people
alive it in every country
the king would not live if there was not
an elite guard and who trains the elite
guard
[Music]
the vanell corporation
it seems to me that there's a point to
the subject which appeared just a little
while ago in the
new york times the washington post and a
great number of other papers
to the effect that there had been a
contract issued
with the vanello corporation and i don't
have any idea what their corporate
connections are
and the defense department of the united
states
and the fact that the vanilla
corporation had signed this contract
for the purpose of training first of all
the national guard of the
saudi arabia and national guard there
means more or less police
and the king's elite guard
i wonder which king they had in mind
because when you control the
elite guard of a country when you train
that guard when you arm that guard when
you teach them to jump from an airplane
at fort bra at
fort um in georgia
benning and in fort bragg give them all
kinds of
weapons training and bring them down to
camp perry in virginia where there's a
nice little resort
that guard knows how to keep a man alive
as long as that guard
agrees to keep that man alive
so i don't know whether the death of
king visal preceded the work of the
vanell corporation
or whether the vanello corporation's
contract began on the 25th of march but
it's awfully important
because whether those men stay alive or
not
is the function of their inner guard
because once you relax
the guard you open up a hornet's nest
a lot of people would like to control
the bank accounts of saudi arabia and
kuwait and dhofar and
the rest of them and what keeps the king
alive is not the election of the
populist because they don't go through
that routine over there
it's simply his guard so this is a key
to it
and the guard in many of these countries
throughout the world
where there have been so many coup
d'etats
a euphemism for the work of mechanics or
assassination these guards for many many
years
in my experience for more than 20 25
years i was in
saudi arabia in 1943 on clandestine
activities
is the work of the central intelligence
agency
and the people who let the contracts for
the central intelligence agency are
called the department of defense
and then the people who do the work are
called such companies as the vanilla
corporation or
air america or some of these others so
you begin to see
what comes about and since i didn't come
here this afternoon to really get into
the
assassination picture too deeply i
wanted to set a stage for it
so let me jump to some of the things
that we know about without
having to dig too far under the surface
that in 1953 the cia had a problem only
this time it was in the country of iran
and moses died of lead poisoning and the
shah who was escaping to the riviera was
brought back
to resume the long 2500 year
line of cyprus king king cyrus
and now he leads the country of iran at
the pleasure
of the agency's number one man in the
world today richard helms
who is called ambassador and so as long
as the guard
in iran can keep the shah alive he'll be
our man there
and as law as asha is our man he'll
probably be alive
[Music]
in jordan where king hussein jets around
and lives by grace of his elite guard
that guard has been trained through
various corporate
devices by the central intelligence
agency for
at least 20 years
and king hosain has about the same
chances of surviving that faisal
or hassan or
the shah have and that is that if he
plays the game
his guard will take care of him
these are important considerations
because they're right there in the
record the thing is that we in this
country
don't think of it that way very often
you see they don't have elections
in many of these third tier
countries how do you replace somebody
this evening we'll hear some talk from
mrs allende how do you
replace people in countries where there
is not provision for election
the people in power hold the power until
somebody else is strong enough
to take it away and that ability to take
it away is a very fleeting thing
sometimes as it was in the case of
trujillo
or in the case of diem but in every case
there are many people willing to move in
and become heads of state
and if the guard which is trained in
many cases
by our own c i a part of their business
now many people write about that or know
about it but that's part of their prime
business in the clandestine area
then the men have the defense that's
necessary to keep them alive
now i'll close with an example but i
think it's an extremely pertinent one
because it leads to what will follow me
on this program
the case of node indium
when diem assumed the power in vietnam
1954 if you'll remember
his country had no antecedent it was
simply a piece of real estate
lying south of some 17th parallel
[Music]
when you take over a piece of real
estate like that
and begin to rule who are your police
who is your army who are your generals
and who are your sergeants
where is your power this is important
where is your power
ed lansdale probably one of the best
agents the agency ever
set in motion came over from the
philippines where he had
created a man named meg saisai as
president of
the philippines pretty good job far that
went
and he brought his team with him to
saigon i happen to be pilot on that
airplane
went into saigon with the same what we
used to call in quotes
robin hood technique that if you can
fool the people you can fool the people
and diem was created
by a secret police trained by special
forces
the green berets in those days i don't
think they wore the green braid because
i'm talking about 55 56
57 and diem owed his existence at the
time to
two clever maneuvers one was the rapid
placement of a good secret police and
secondly the purchase
of an army because if you remember there
were two armies
in cholon they were more or less
mercenaries and they
purchased the army now as long as diem
had that backing
he was in pretty good shape by the
summer
of 1963 a summer that
we all could write about and research
about a lot more that was a very
important summer there were papers
coming across my desk
at that time i was working in the office
of the joint chiefs of staff
papers with no top secret stamps on them
no eyes only stamps on them no
register numbers on them that meant they
were really secret
because if they're really secrets you
don't put anything on them
and a man would come up to you and he'd
say have you seen this and it would say
we've had enough of them what are we
gonna do about him well
just that idea means
that it won't be long till uh
bullets are flying because what happens
in saigon
somebody like lou conning is told hey go
check out the generals
find out which general could take over
the job general big man or
negan khan or key or
key not ready but khan or men might be
ready check them out
the minute you tell people that in a
city like saigon
you could do it today the minute you
tell people that
they go back to their sources of power
and they say
you know what the united states is
changing its policy
and it was changing its policy and so
you stand on a stack of bibles
in fact uh chuck colson and howard hunt
tried to rewrite the sack of bibles to
prove that it was kennedy that said
shoot him but nobody in washington
said shoot diem you don't do an
assassination that way
the way people are assassinated
assassinated is by taking away
the power that has been created to keep
them there it's a lot easier that way
more interest to me than a genealogy
of lee harvey oswald and all the rest
is who said let's go to dallas jack
i understand that kenny o'donnell feels
real bad about it
i understand that bobby kennedy had said
from time to time he wished he had put
his foot down
[Music]
jerry bruno the greatest advanced man in
politics
went there but did jerry bruno pick the
route maybe mark can tell you
[Music]
who did who decided let's go to dallas
you've been to fort worth you got to go
to dallas
that's important because whoever decided
that knew some things
i have worked with the secret service in
their
good work to keep presidents alive i
went to mexico city
when eisenhower was going down in 1956
and i'll tell you the secret service
knows the game like the gorillas in
france knew the game
they can keep the president alive where
where were they
how does it happen you can have a
six-story building with a lot of empty
floors
and they neither wired and sealed the
doors as their manual
says they will nor had anybody on the
roof with
high-powered guns and with radios as
their manual says they will
or had a man in dealey plaza to look at
the man at the roof and to look at the
windows
as their manual says there will
and if you don't drive over 44 miles an
hour a nice figure but it works out in
tests why did they bring that car down
to a crawling speed those are more
important to me
than the genealogy of lee harvey oswald
and everybody else on the grassy normal
i think i'll stop there that's what i
call the anatomy of assassinations it
gets you thinking you know
thank you very much
for more information about the central
intelligence agency
contact center for national security
studies
122 maryland avenue northwest
washington dc 2002
this program was produced at radio
station wwuh
in west hartford connecticut